---
layout: post
title: "San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge"
date: {30 September 2013}
categories: infrastructure
author: Jordona Jackson
"author-initials": jj
header: "http://fpoimg.com/940x350"
banner: "http://placehold.it/1250x440&text=FPO"
published: true
---

Well the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge has finally opened. Yes, it took far too long to build and yes, it was really expensive. But achieving seismic safety on such a massive project was a hard fought victory and, though it wasn't perfect, one we can be proud of. After all, we gained more than a safe bridge - we learned new best practices in engineering and construction, we developed cutting-edge environmental mitigation technology, and we figured out how to navigate around political landmines, mostly missing them but sometimes stepping into them with such oomph that it made national news. As a communications team, though, we discovered a new way of doing our job.
 
I had just graduated from college when I joined the Bay Bridge's communications team and I mostly believed that the general responsibilities of a PR team lie somewhere between making the client look better than it really is, and doing something about it when it starts to look bad. In the years that I spent with that team, though, I realized that we weren't just trying to make the project look better; we were trying to make the project actually be better.
 
The natural inclination with projects like this is almost always to power through the construction without giving consideration to much else. But because of the nature of the work and the significance of the bridge within the context of the region, this project needed a different approach to communications.
 
We began by sending public announcements to stakeholders and nearby residents when interesting - or noisy - work would be taking place in downtown San Francisco. People would respond with questions about the construction. So we took the outreach one step further and enlisted interested organizations to tour the construction site, giving them a chance to see the work and have their questions answered. By late 2012, we were providing tours to several thousand people per year.
 
Instead of holding press events to inform media about milestones, we decided to educate them. Media was invited to walk through the job site and was shown locations where crews were encountering challenges and elements of the design that make the Bay Bridge unlike any bridge on Earth. Not only did we have great turnout at these events, but the reporting was more accurate than it had been previously because reporters were finally understanding how the bridge was being built.
 
We used Google Earth, a Webby Award-winning interactive website, mobile applications and even a mobile video game to offer information to the public in a way that was fun and engaging. For a public works project, this was not an easy feat. Transparency and honesty helped create the sense of stewardship that was palpable on the bridge's opening day and in the days that followed. It was never easy and it wasn't always fun, but we learned lessons that won't be forgotten anytime soon; and isn't that what it's all about?